---
toc: true
comments: false
layout: post
title: Jinja 2 Lesson
author: Nitin, Sergi, Ishan, Saat
description: Week 20 Plans
courses: { csp: {week: 20} }
type: tangibles
---

## Jinja 2 Overview
- Jinja2 is a templating engine for Python.
- Widely used in web development frameworks like Flask and Django.
- Supports template inheritance for creating modular and reusable code.
- Provides flexible syntax for embedding Python-like expressions in templates.
- Offers built-in filters for data manipulation and formatting.
- Supports control structures like loops and conditionals.
- Automatically escapes HTML characters by default, enhancing web application security.

## Creating and Migrating database
The first object is to create and migrate a database. Run the script below to ensure database is created, primed, and has some starting data. Anytime a developer changes schema, this script needs to be run.

```bash
# Setup database and init data
# open terminal to root directory of project
./migrate.sh'
```  

```bash
# Set environment variables
export FLASK_APP=main
export PYTHONPATH=.:$PYTHONPATH
```

- These lines set environment variables. FLASK_APP is set to main, indicating the main Flask application to be run. PYTHONPATH is updated to include the current directory, allowing Python to find modules and packages in the current directory.

```bash
# Check if sqlite3 is installed
if ! command -v sqlite3 &> /dev/null; then
    echo "Error: sqlite3 is not installed. Please install it before running this script."
    exit 1
fi
```
- This block checks if the sqlite3 command is available. If not, it displays an error message and exits with a status code of 1.

```bash
# Check if python3 is installed
if ! command -v python3 &> /dev/null; then
    echo "Error: python3 is not installed. Please install it before running this script."
    exit 1
fi
```
- Similar to the previous block, this one checks for the presence of python3 command and exits with an error message if it's not found.

```bash
# Check if Flask is installed
if ! python3 -m flask --version &> /dev/null; then
    echo "Error: Flask is not installed. Please install it before running this script."
    exit 1
fi
```
- This block checks if Flask is installed by attempting to run python3 -m flask --version. If Flask is not found, it exits with an error message.

```bash
# Check if the migration directory exists
if [ ! -d "migrations" ]; then
    echo "Initializing migration for the first time..."
    python3 -m flask db init
fi
```
 - This section checks if the directory migrations exists. If not, it initializes Flask database migrations using python3 -m flask db init.